the Oldenburg family tomorrow,
and they'll have a home-going celebration
for Mrs. Linda went home to be with the Lord.
And so if you'd pray for that,
I know that the family would greatly appreciate that.
I believe it's scheduled for two o'clock tomorrow afternoon.
And if you'd pray for that, I know they'd appreciate it.
Psalm chapter number three,
and we'll be looking at verses seven and eight this evening.
Back on the 1st of December, the first week of December,
we started a mini-series through this psalm,
Psalm chapter number three.
And on the first six verses, we took two verses a week.
And during those first three lessons,
as we looked at this psalm,
we discovered the reality of the situation
in verses one and two.
In verses three and four,
we discovered the response of David to the situation.
And then in verses five and six,
we looked at the rest of David
and how that he rested in the Lord.
Notice in verse number one, the Bible says,
"'Lord, how are they increased that trouble me?
"'Many are they that rise up against me,
"'many there be which say of my soul,
"'there is no help for him in God, Selah.'"
This was the reality of the situation that David was facing.
We know that the Bible teaches us,
and as we look at contextually what's going on,
you look back and you can find that really the setting
of this particular psalm is believed to be
that of the revolt, the rebellion and revolt of Absalom.
And you can read of that
in 2 Samuel chapters 15 through 19.
And you see that it was a serious situation.
David was not exaggerating the circumstances.
He was not just pretending that this was some difficulty.
This was a serious situation in which he was dealing with.
And we noted the reality of the situation.
We said that the response to the situation
was noteworthy and exemplary.
You find it in verses three and four.
Notice what David says as he responds to the situation,
"'But thou, O Lord, art a shield for me.'"
Remember, they were saying
there is no help for him in God, Selah.
But David says,
"'I understand, God, that you are a shield for me,
"'my glory and the lifter up of mine head.'"
Notice what he says in verse number four,
"'I cried unto the Lord with my voice,
"'and he heard me out of his holy hill, Selah.'"
Isn't that a great response to such a difficult situation?
And we find that it's important for us
to understand the response of David
and understand that we too should respond in like fashion
when we deal with difficulty and adversity
and troubles and trials, how we cry to the Lord,
how we trust in God and depend upon him.
And after we pour out our heart to God,
after we carry our burdens to the Lord,
knowing that he cares for us,
we find that we can have a great rest,
a great peace that passeth all understanding.
And that's what we see in verses five and six.
Notice the Bible says,
"'I laid me down and slept.
"'I awaked, for the Lord sustained me.
"'I will not be afraid of 10,000s of people
"'that have set themselves against me roundabout.'"
Why?
Because he's trusting in the Lord
and he's taken his burden to the Lord and he's laid it.
The Bible tells us, "'Cast thy burden upon the Lord.
"'He will sustain thee.'"
Knowing that we're to cast all of our care upon him.
Why?
"'For he careth for us, he careth for you.'"
And what great truth that is.
And we find here in verses five and six,
this great peace and this rest that David experiences.
And how in our lives,
when we deal with troubles and trials and difficulties,
we respond to those by going to God
and then we can rest knowing that God is able.
And what great truth that is
and how important it is that we understand
that rest that is possible for us.
This evening, as we look at verses seven and eight,
we will note the rejoicing of David.
I've used for the title,
the first phrase in verse number eight,
"'Salvation belongeth unto the Lord.'"
But if you're kind of taking notes
for each of these lessons
and really looking at the four divisions of Psalm three,
the rejoicing of David is what is in focus this evening.
Notice in verse number seven,
the Bible says, "'Arise, O Lord, save me, O my God.
"'For thou hast smitten all mine enemies upon the cheekbone.
"'Thou hast broken the teeth of the ungodly.
"'Salvation belongeth unto the Lord.
"'Thy blessing is upon thy people, Selah.'"
So we note the rejoicing
and we think about the rejoicing of David
as it's seen in verses seven and eight.
I wanna emphasize just for a moment
by way of introduction this evening,
the importance of praise in the life of a believer.
We understand that we have many reasons to rejoice.
The Bible tells us in Psalm 118 and verse number 24,
in fact, we sing the song often,
this is the day the Lord hath made.
We will what?
Rejoice in it, right?
And be glad.
And you think about that rejoicing,
understanding that God has planned,
that God has purpose, that God is in control.
And we're gonna rejoice understanding who God is.
Think about that great truth
that is given in Philippians chapter number four
and verse number four.
Rejoice in the Lord, how often?
All way, right?
Though he says rejoice in the Lord all way,
again, I say rejoice.
Well, that's impactful.
It's pretty plain, is it not?
Rejoice in the Lord all way.
And again, I say rejoice.
You know, as human beings,
we could identify and understand
there are times in which it seems to be
a little bit easier to rejoice
in our particular circumstances and situations.
But God tells us to rejoice in the Lord all way.
And again, I say rejoice.
Giving thanks always for all things.
That's all-inclusive.
And that's the instruction that's been given to us
as the people of God.
We find it in 1 Thessalonians 5 and verse number 16.
The Bible says this, rejoice evermore.
Simple, rejoice evermore.
And really, it's a mindset,
it's a purpose that we have in our lives
that we are going to purpose to rejoice.
And we are going to look for,
in every circumstance, in every situation,
we're gonna find reason to rejoice.
I don't wanna embarrass my mom this evening,
but after Christmas, so don't let it be an embarrassment,
after Christmas, the family all left
on that Sunday afternoon.
My brother left and my parents left.
And Monday morning, I got to go out to the truck to leave
and I was looking for my coat
and my coat wasn't at my house.
And I thought, man, this is a problem.
Where's my coat?
And so I came over to my office,
I looked in my office, it's not my office,
I went to the fellowship hall,
I looked all over the place, can't find my coat.
And I said, you know what,
I bet you my mom grabbed it by accident.
So I called my mom, mom, do you have my coat?
She's like, I don't know.
Finds it, yep, here it is.
And I said, well, I'm on my way.
So I went to go pick it up.
And in the midst of that situation,
I was really trying to follow
what I'm saying to you this evening.
You know what the Lord gave me?
I was thankful that my mom took it and not my brother.
I had a 30 minute drive, not a five hour drive, right?
And you say, that's just kind of elementary.
I understand, but sometimes in life,
something like that could irritate us, right?
We say, man, we're inconvenienced,
it's an irritant, it's a problem.
But the reality is that we can learn to rejoice.
I don't know how that, as I look at a schedule,
and many of you know my personality,
I've been here for over 10 years,
and some of you have been here for the duration of that,
and you know my personality.
I'm a scheduled person.
I like to stick to the punctuality and what have you.
I had a plan as a time we were gonna leave
to go to visit Holly's family,
and then all of a sudden, this thing happens,
and it could really twist you up.
But how do I know if that 30 minute drive
to get my coat didn't keep us
from being in the midst of an accident
if we would have left at the time, right?
And we just have no idea.
And what we do is in our lives,
and I'm not perfect at it,
but we have to purpose to rejoice.
As we look at the final two verses in Psalm 3,
we find the rejoicing of David.
The situation, the reality of the situation was serious.
I mean, it was a serious situation he was dealing with,
but he's relying upon the Lord.
He's trusting God.
He's sought the face of God.
He's resting in God, and now he is rejoicing.
The first phrase in verse number seven
of our study this evening confirms for us two truths
that we find throughout the entirety of the Psalm.
Notice the first phrase here in verse number seven.
Arise, O Lord, save me, O my God.
I believe that in this statement
that the two truths that are confirmed to us are this,
number one, David is confident in the Lord.
He is confident in the ability of God
and the power of the Lord to save him.
He is confident.
He is convinced that God is able,
and I believe he has that full confidence.
And we need to have confidence in God as we live life,
as we go through this journey,
as we deal with difficulties and adversities,
that we can have confidence in knowing
that our God is able,
that there's nothing that's too hard for him,
that there's no trial, no situation,
no circumstance that's beyond his ability,
and we need to understand that we.
are to be confident in him.
I believe the second truth that is revealed to us
in this statement to begin verse number seven
is that David is dependent upon the Lord.
Notice he says, arise, O Lord, save me, O my God.
The personal relationship is there, obviously.
He says, O my God, the personal understanding.
But you find that he's dependent upon the Lord.
He's trusting that God, he is confident in God's ability,
but he's fully dependent on God to work.
And how we need to depend upon God,
trust in him wholly and completely,
and you find that he is wholly true.
And he is trustworthy, and we ought to rejoice in that.
Now look at the rejoicing.
Notice the remainder of verse number seven.
Notice this, the Bible says,
for thou hast smitten all mine enemies upon the cheekbone.
Thou hast broken the teeth of the ungodly.
I want you to notice the phrase that is repeated twice
in this portion of verse number seven.
Notice the Bible says, thou hast.
And when you see that phrase, he says,
thou hast smitten all mine enemies upon the cheekbone.
Thou hast broken the teeth of the ungodly.
What we find is that David is rejoicing,
and we find that what God has done for us,
and that which he has done on our behalf,
should cause us to rejoice.
When we look back and we remember the blessings of God,
we remember the working of God,
and we find that David here is looking back
and he's remembering what God has done.
Thou hast done these things.
And in Psalm 77 in verse number 10,
the Bible says this, and I said, this is my infirmity,
but I will remember the years of the right hand
of the Most High.
I will remember the works of the Lord.
Surely I will remember thy wonders of old.
I will meditate also of all thy work
and talk of thy doings.
You know, it's a good thing for us
to remember what God has done.
And as we remember what God has done,
it should cause us to rejoice.
Because we're acknowledging, we're meditating upon,
we're remembering, we're rehearsing those things
in our mind, and he says, thou hast smitten
all mine enemies upon the cheekbone.
Thou hast broken the teeth of the ungodly.
And I find that David is rejoicing here,
and he's rejoicing because God has worked.
Not only should the recollection of God's working
and the remembrance that is mentioned here for,
he's speaking of those past victories
and the past working of God,
not only should that cause us to rejoice,
but I believe this evening that it should cause us
to trust God in our current situation.
Think about the rehearsing.
Think about what he's remembering.
It's just summarized in two statements.
Thou hast smitten all mine enemies upon the cheekbone.
Thou hast broken the teeth of the ungodly.
But as David is the one that is penning this psalm,
as he's recalling and remembering,
you think about the floods of memories
that would permeate his mind as he's writing these words,
and he's mindful of what God has done,
which will result in the rejoicing,
but it also leads to trusting,
because if God was able to do it before,
then he's able to do it now, right?
God doesn't change.
He's the same yesterday and today and forever,
and we find here that David is rejoicing,
but through the rejoicing as he set his mind,
remember I said this, we must purpose to rejoice.
This is the day the Lord hath made.
We will rejoice and be glad in it.
Rejoice in the Lord always,
and again I say rejoice, rejoice evermore.
When I purpose to rejoice, all of a sudden,
what's happening is my focus and my attention is Godward,
instead of on my problem, instead of on my situation,
and what we find is that God is greater
than any situation that we face.
What happens so often in our lives
is that we have so much of our focus
and so much of our attention upon our problem,
and our problem just continues to grow and grow and grow,
and we're just so focused upon our problem
that we're not rejoicing as we see David doing here,
and therefore our attention is not Godward.
We're just so focused on whatever the problem at hand is.
We mentioned that in the response in verses three and four
when he responded by praising the Lord,
thanking God for who he is,
and declaring his dependence upon God
in verses three and four,
and as we noted that in that study a few weeks ago,
we understood that that too is how we should respond,
and when we respond in that fashion,
our attention is upon the Lord.
The more we focus on a problem,
the bigger the problem becomes.
It just can consume us,
and we find here that his attention is Godward.
Why?
Because he's rejoicing,
because he's praising God for what he, God,
has done on his behalf.
Notice in verse number eight that David recognizes
that salvation belongeth unto the Lord.
This here, as you often find in the Old Testament,
especially in the Book of Psalms,
the term salvation is not the same use of the word
that we would use in New Testament Christianity
of being saved, being born again,
but it's a word that is often used
to simply deal with deliverance.
Now, we understand when we speak of our salvation
that we're speaking about our deliverance
from the penalty of sin,
and here, in many other areas in the Book of Psalms,
when you read the salvation that is being discussed,
he's speaking about the deliverance that God has provided,
such as what he has mentioned in verse number seven,
where God had smitten all his enemies
and broken the teeth of the ungodly,
and notice the recognition here.
The very truth of this recognition
that salvation or deliverance belongs to God
would cause us to rejoice.
It's not in my power, it's not in my ability
to provide deliverance.
It's not up to me to come up with the plan for deliverance.
You think about the life of David,
and you think about the many victories,
the triumphs of David as you read throughout his life.
Remember, this is near the end of his life.
This is during the time of the rebellion
and revolt of Absalom,
and you think about all that has taken place
prior to that in the life of David,
and you read of all of his triumphs and all of the victories,
and as you begin to fill your mind
with recalling those great things
that are recorded in 1 and 2 Samuel,
and reading of all of those great victories,
you find that David, as he makes the statement,
salvation belongeth unto the Lord,
that just the recognition of that truth
would lead to rejoicing,
thanking God that he is our deliverer,
that he is the one that provides deliverance.
David fought many times against the Philistines,
and it started, of course, we understand,
in that great battle against Goliath,
and we're familiar with 1 Samuel in chapter number 17,
and we look at that passage of Scripture,
and it's a very prominent portion of Scripture,
and one in which we find just great encouragement,
and the reality is that when David goes
to fight against Goliath,
he was not depending upon himself.
When Saul tries to give him the armor
and all that he tries to give him,
David understands that, listen,
salvation belongeth unto the Lord.
He understood that it was God
that had delivered him previously,
and that it was God that would fight on his behalf.
There were times in which he fought the Philistines,
and there were times in which the Philistines
invaded cities, and David would seek the face of God.
He would inquire of the Lord to find out,
what shall I do, how should I proceed?
And God would answer, and God would provide direction,
and as he was depending upon the Lord,
he understood that it was the Lord
that brought the deliverance.
Salvation belongeth unto the Lord.
Often in our lives, we begin to think about
these great truths like what we find
declared here in verse number seven and eight,
how that we would take those truths
and allow those to be a catalyst to our rejoicing.
When you think about the importance of rejoicing
in the life of a believer,
and the prominence of rejoicing in our lives,
and that the Lord is worthy of our praise,
then there's some statements, some truths such as this
that will be utilized in our lives
as a catalyst to cause us to rejoice.
Salvation belongeth unto the Lord,
and we just begin to think about the deliverance
that he's provided for us as New Testament believers
as we use that term salvation to speak about our redemption.
Oh man, how that brings a whole nother dynamic
to the equation and understanding
that redemption is only through the blood
of the Lord Jesus Christ,
and how that ought to cause us to rejoice.
I couldn't save myself and you can't save yourself, right?
It's impossible.
And so we understand even as we would take that term
and utilize it and apply it the way that we would
as New Testament believers,
we can rejoice in understanding
that salvation belongeth unto the Lord.
And I'm thankful that he's a wonderful savior.
Notice the last statement of verse number eight.
Okay, thy blessing is upon thy people.
Selah.
To finish out the psalm,
we find that David references
the blessing of God.
You think about the blessing of God.
I'm so thankful for God's good hand of blessing.
I'm thankful for the many blessings
that He's bestowed upon us.
We sing songs about count your blessings,
name them one by one.
We understand that as we would consider
thy blessing is upon thy people,
again, a reason to rejoice
in the rejoicing of David,
a catalyst if you will,
just as we saw in that first statement
of verse 8,
to lead us, to lead David
to a place of rejoicing.
And I want you to understand
that as David is remembering
the fact that God is blessing
and that His blessing is upon His people,
we must be mindful of this truth
this evening that God's blessings
come in different forms
and at different times.
There can be something in our life
that's a blessing and sometimes
we don't really look at it
as being a blessing
because we just have a wrong perspective
because we think that a blessing
is something that is defined
by our finite ability to describe
or to define what a blessing is,
but the reality is that
in God's infinite wisdom
and in His mercy,
He gives blessings to His people
and there are times in which
we may not even recognize things
as being blessings.
I finished reading the book of Genesis
this morning in my personal devotions
and I was mindful again
of just the wonderful account
of the life of Joseph
and many of you know
that he's my favorite Bible character
and as I was reading once again
that portion of Scripture
that details all that takes place
at the deliverance of the people of God
through the provision
and that provision being the result
of Joseph being in that place.
When Joseph revealed himself
to his brothers,
he tells them,
God sent me before you
to preserve life.
When Dad dies
and the brothers send a servant
to say, hey, before Dad died,
he told us that you should forgive us
for our evil that we did unto you.
And Joseph says, yes,
you meant it for evil,
but God meant it for good
to save much people alive.
Man, can you imagine?
In fact, as you look
at the life of Joseph
and you understand
what's taking place there
and you see how God was working,
it's very challenging for us
in the midst of the situation
to understand all that's taking place.
But I want you to be mindful.
And of course, in our study
through the book of Genesis,
we'll get here eventually.
But in chapter number 41,
just real quickly,
the sons of Joseph are listed
Manasseh and Ephraim.
And Manasseh,
he named his firstborn Manasseh
according to Genesis 41 and 51
for God said he hath made me
to forget all my toil
in all my father's house
and then he named his second son
Ephraim and notice what he says.
For God hath caused me to be fruitful
in the land of my affliction.
Thinking about the blessings of God.
And I don't think even at that point,
as you understand what's taking place
and you're acknowledging
the the timeline
and what's going on here
at this particular time,
Joseph's brothers had not yet
come to visit Egypt.
But it was through
all of those circumstances
that had taken place in Joseph's life
that God allowed him to be in the place
where he was to preserve life.
It's amazing.
Sometimes as we look at a truth
such as this in verse number eight,
really in verses seven and eight,
as we think about what's taking place
in the rejoicing,
it's hard for us to understand
how we could rejoice
in times of great difficulty.
But the reality is that we can
and we should.
The situation is still the situation.
Verses one and two
is still the situation,
the reality of the situation,
the rebellion, the revolt of Absalom.
And we find that he's responded
by depending upon the Lord,
crying out to the Lord,
acknowledging who God is
and what God is able to do.
We find that after David
pours out his heart to God,
he remembers and recalls
who God is to him
and how God will work on his behalf
that he rests in the Lord.
He's taken his burden to the Lord
and he now rests.
And the Bible tells us
that he's rejoicing.
It's interesting,
as you note the truth,
if you want to take a moment
and turn to the book of Philippians
and the fourth chapter,
we've mentioned already
verse number four
by way of introduction,
rejoice in the Lord always.
And again, I say rejoice.
A few verses later,
we find the Bible tells us
this truth about being careful
for nothing in Philippians
four and verse number six.
Be careful for nothing.
But in everything,
by prayer and supplication
with thanksgiving,
let your requests
be made known unto God,
it says, and the peace of God,
which passeth all understanding
shall keep your hearts
and minds through Christ Jesus.
Paul goes on to say
in verse number 10,
but I rejoiced in the Lord
greatly that now at the last
your care of me
hath flourished again,
wherein you were also careful,
but you lacked opportunity.
Not that I speak
in respect of want,
for I have learned
in what sort of state
I am there with to be content,
understanding that God's purposes
in his in his life
are for a purpose and for a reason
and therefore his good.
But you notice,
as you look at verses
four through seven
and you compare that
with the truth of Psalm three
that we've studied here
for four weeks now
on Wednesday evening
and you see the rejoicing,
it's kind of reverse order,
but you see the rejoicing
in the Lord always.
And again, I say rejoice.
We see that in verses seven
and eight of Psalm three.
You find that he says,
be careful for nothing,
but in everything by prayer
and supplication
with thanksgiving,
let your requests
be made known unto God.
And really in Psalm three,
you see that in verses
three and four.
The peace of God
that is mentioned
in verse number seven
of Philippians four
is what we see in verses
five and six of Psalm three,
where there's that great peace,
the rest that David experiences.
And then, of course,
the situation
or the circumstance,
really, you'd have to look
at the entirety
of the book of Philippians
to understand that Paul is writing
from a place of Roman prison.
And Paul's writing
from a place of Roman prison,
but he's rejoicing.
It's a book that really
the theme of the book
of Philippians
is the joy of the Lord and rejoice.
And Paul's writing from prison.
He's saying rejoice.
In fact, it's in my mind,
it's so connected
when you think about the theme
of the book of Philippians
and the repeated reference
to rejoicing,
because you'll recall
that while Paul and Silas
were in prison
after they'd been beaten
and cast in the inner prison,
it was there
that they were rejoicing.
They're praying and singing
praise unto the Lord.
They're rejoicing.
God worked.
God moved the earthquake.
And we, of course,
are familiar with the response
of the Philippian jailer.
Sirs, what must I do to be saved?
In that adverse situation,
the circumstance
that Paul and Silas
could have been in there
saying this isn't fair,
they've falsely accused us
and they've beaten us
and so on and so forth.
And I just can't believe
we're in this place.
We're just trying to serve God.
All we're trying to do
is obey God
and look at what's happened.
Look at what it's got us.
Do you think the Philippian jailer
would say, sirs,
what must I do to be saved?
I have a hard time believing
that they would respond that way.
But when they hear,
when he hears men
that are praising God
after being beaten.
That are rejoicing
and singing and praying.
Man, that's impactful.
This evening, as we conclude
our mini series on Psalm three,
I hope that we've been encouraged.
We've understood
that we can relate to the psalmist
and so many other portions
of Scripture
throughout the word of God
that is relatable to us
as human beings,
that David was a man.
He was a human being just as we are,
and he dealt with difficulties
and adversities.
And when we think about
the reality of the situation
and the pressures of life
and the oppositions
that we deal with,
how do we respond to those?
We must respond the way
that David did in verses
three and four.
We must respond
by reminding ourselves
who our God is to us.
He's my shield,
my protector, my defender.
He's my glory.
He's the lifter up of my head.
When the when the world
seems to be against us
and we can find ourselves
becoming discouraged,
and I mentioned this
when we looked at
that second lesson,
there are times in which
you think about
a discouraged individual.
What you think about
their countenance
is that their their head is downward.
But God is the lifter up of my head.
He encourages us.
What a joy that is.
That is.
And once we cast our burden unto the Lord,
knowing that He will sustain us,
we need to leave it with Him
and just rest in God.
Knowing that God is able.
Be careful for nothing.
Knowing that He is able to do in that situation
what I cannot do,
what you cannot do.
And He's able to make it good.
He's able to bring out of that situation
something far greater than we could ever bring out of that situation.
And we know that all things work together for good, right?
Romans 8 and verse number 28.
He wants us to know that.
He wants us to have confidence in that.
You know, that God would help us to rejoice.
In the midst of difficulties? Absolutely.
Because He says,
this is the day the Lord hath made.
I will rejoice and be glad in it.
Rejoice in the Lord always.
And again, I say rejoice.
Rejoice evermore.
There's really no wiggle room in the Scriptures
to say, you know what?
I deserve to be able to complain about this situation.
You're not going to find any wiggle room in the Word of God.
He says rejoice.
And when we know who our God is,
and when we know what He's able to do,
it'll lead us to rejoicing.
Oh, that God would help us to rejoice
even in the midst of great difficulty.
Father, we love You and we thank You for loving us.
We thank You for this short psalm.
That's been an encouragement to me.
I trust a help to those that have had the opportunity
to hear the teaching of Your Word.
God, I know that each one of us
deal with a variety of difficulties.
And I know that sometimes those difficulties
can be greater than at other times.
But God, we rejoice in knowing that You're greater.
That You have a plan and a purpose.
And though we may not always understand it,
it is important that we rest in that fact, that truth.
God, would You help us to have confidence in who You are
and what You're able to do?
Would You help us to depend upon You wholly, fully, completely?
Would You help us to rejoice, to rejoice greatly?
Thank You for the privilege of prayer.
I pray that You'd bless our time.
We'll thank You for what You'll do.
For it's in Christ's name we pray, amen.
Someone need a prayer bulletin this evening?